At this point in our program, we're going to move into the student portion, and we're
going to get to enjoy some student experiences, including field service experiences, interviews,
and reenactments from around the world.
One of the Gillied Instructors, Brother James Coffin, is going to take the lead in this
part of the program.
And Brother Coffin has gotten to know you dear students quite well, it's been a lot of
time with you, so we know we're going to enjoy this part very much with a theme, the
language of Canaan.
Over the past five months, the Gillied students have discussed a number of Bible prophecies.
One such prophecy is found in the book of Isaiah, chapter 19, verse 18.
It reads like this.
In that day, there were proved to be five cities in the land of Egypt, speaking the language
of Canaan and swearing to Jehovah's armies.
The city of Taring down will one city be called.
This prophecy was initially fulfilled after the events of 607 BCE by the Jews who had
fled to Egypt.
They were speaking the Hebrew language in the cities of Egypt.
Today there are people in the territory of modern-day Egypt who've learned to speak the
pure language of Bible truth.
One of the five figurative cities is called the city of Taring down, signifying that part
of the pure language is related to exposing and tearing down Satan's organization.
Let us see how this Bible prophecy is being fulfilled today.
Working with me as we give attention to GSBN, the Gillied School Broadcasting Network
for some worldwide reports.
Welcome to GSBN, Gillied School Broadcasting Network.
Coming to you from Patterson Educational Center on Channel 140.
We have an exciting program for you today focusing on the language of Canaan, the pure language
spoken by Jehovah's people.
We'll be traveling around the world revisiting experiences of the 140th class of Gilead.
Our report will feature students witnessing in their home territories.
The challenge one couple faced when preparing to come to Gilead and the opportunity to witness
another couple had while traveling here.
We'll also feature an experience one of the students enjoyed right here in the local
territory in New York.
Well it sounds like a full program.
Where do we go first?
We start with our correspondent in Papua New Guinea.
This is Norma Hadu reporting from Papua New Guinea.
I am now at the local airport.
We are waiting for brother Joseph Stewart who is a circuit over seer who is on his way
to the next congregation.
He is invited to the 140th class of Gilead and we understand that he has some field experiences
to share with us.
And the plane just arrived and let's see if we can find him and ask some questions.
And okay.
And Joe.
Hello.
Hi Joe.
Hi.
I'm Norman from GSBN.
We are so excited that you will be soon attending Gilead's school.
Do you have some field experiences to share with us?
Oh, experience.
That's quite a lot.
Or this one.
We met a young man in the ministry who has a background in the truth.
He ended up in a gang.
We invited him to the meeting and he did come.
Later on I started Bible study with him and he progressed to the point where he could
enroll at the teacuristics school.
Did he face any challenges?
Well, he's constantly started to bother him because he has escaped from a prison.
What escaped from prison?
And what did he do about his situation?
Well, first of all, I was stunned.
But both of us looked up the principal in Romans chapter 13, verse 1 to 7.
And he made his own decision that he has to turn himself over to the authorities.
Impressive.
That shows the power of God's word and what happened next.
Because of his good behavior, they reduced his prison sentence and after he was released,
he made progress and also received his Bible study.
And in 2011, he got baptized and not long after that, he regularly applied.
That's amazing progress.
Well, actually, no.
Now, he's a better light than saving in a first remote translation office here in Papua New Guinea.
That's so great.
And one last question, what did you learn from this situation?
Well, I learned that we should never give up on people.
I agree.
Thank you, Joe.
And we wish you Jehovah's blessing at Gillette.
My pleasure.
And you have a nice day.
That's so great to have so many experiences.
And this is Norman Pally, reporting from Papua New Guinea.
Now, we're going back to you at the studio.
Thank you for that report.
What an excellent experience.
It shows the power of the pure language to help people make big changes in their lives.
That's true.
One of our favorite segments here on GSBN is reports from public witnessing locations around the world.
Today, we would like to welcome a guest into our studio, Brother Dirk Grunman.
Welcome, Dirk.
For our viewers, can you describe where you share in public witnessing?
Thanks, Chad and Crystal Lee.
The location is mine's Germany, where we regularly set up a public witnessing table.
We understand that some publishers have learned a greeting in the languages of your territory.
Have you had an opportunity to use those greetings?
Yes, we have a nice experience and I brought a clip along that we can show to your viewers today.
Well, let's take a look.
Dirk, did you see the gentleman sitting over there on the bench?
I wonder where he is from.
Maybe he's from Ghana.
Let me see if I can greet him in a tree.
What is he saying? Within the coffee, Brunei?
Hey, what a tree.
Know your partner also.
Oh, I'm sorry, sir. That's all the tree I know, but I'm happy to meet you.
Are you from Ghana?
Yes, I am.
And where did you learn your tree?
Some time ago, my wife and I attended a convention of Jehovah's Witnesses in your country.
How do you like Ghana?
It was very nice. We had a very nice time with our local friends there and really enjoyed it.
Have you talked to Jehovah's Witnesses before?
I've seen them, but I've never really had a chance to talk to them.
Well, actually, we enjoy talking to our neighbours about the good news of God's Kingdom.
How it will one day transform the whole earth into a paradise.
Oh, that is a nice picture.
Actually, my wife and I are visiting Germany for a short time.
But we wouldn't mind worshipping with you.
Where is your church?
Maybe we can take a taxi and go there.
Oh, our Kingdom Hall.
Well, actually, it's not too far from here, but we can also give you a ride.
Okay.
Close my card.
I stay in the hotel near the train station.
That's my phone number.
Okay, I will give you a call on Thursday afternoon and then we can pick you up in the evening.
Okay, that will be fine.
Bye-bye. Bye-bye.
Thank you for bringing that clip.
It really shows the importance of being observant when we're involved in the public ministry.
And how it touches people's hearts when we use a greeting in their language,
opening the way to be able to share the pure language with them.
Can you give us an update on that experience?
Yes, they came to our next meeting and were very well dressed.
In fact, some of the German brothers were suspecting they were visitors from Brooklyn.
But then we were surprised that all the local brothers from his country they actually knew him.
From television, because he had been a prominent politician.
He and his wife, they really enjoyed the program, the association, and especially our singing.
And we are still in touch with them.
Actually, it was that very same morning at our public witnessing table that we had another nice conversation.
And maybe we also want to watch the next clip.
Oh, yeah. Let's take a look.
Hello. Do you speak English?
Yes, I do. My name is Derk. Please to meet you.
I'm Jacek. I am here as a student from Poland.
My parents are Jehovah's Witnesses. But I'm not.
They told me I should visit your headquarter.
And I understand this somewhere in this area. Can you tell me where it is?
Yes, actually my wife and I will live and work there.
It's not far. And if you visit, you can come anytime from Monday to Friday.
Let me give you our address and also our phone number.
So that if you come by train, we can pick you up at the local station.
Okay, good. I will contact you. Bye.
So, Derk, can you tell us what happened next?
Well, a few days later, you guessed it. The phone rang.
And he and his girlfriend were there waiting for us at the train station.
So they had a nice tour of Bessel and we still spend some time together to further their interest.
Well, it sounds like because this family encouraged him to visit the branch,
he was able to see the pure language and action among God's people.
Thank you for coming into the studio today and sharing those experiences with us.
Well, it's clear the students were hard at work in their home territories.
And once they were invited to Gilead, things only got busier.
The students did face some challenges.
We ever report that was filed by a correspondent who visited Kyrgyzstan.
It highlights Jehovah's Hand in helping one couple get the needed paperwork to be able to come to Gilead.
Welcome to Kyrgyzstan.
Before Class 140 of Gilead started, many of the students had concerns about whether they be able to obtain their visas.
There was a major technical problem with the U.S. visa issuing system all around the world,
and here in Bishkek, many have been unable to get visas.
Brother and sister Jackie, I've made the situation a specific matter of prayer to Jehovah,
and they asked others to pray on their behalf too.
As part of the process, they had to have an interview at the U.S. Embassy.
And when they checked, there was only one interview available for the whole of the week.
How did they get on? Let's look in on reenactment.
So, Jackie, if we are going to stay in the United States, in Paris and New York.
And you too?
Yes, I am.
Okay. Gilead School. What is Gilead School?
It is the school where I studied the Bible.
Interesting. I've never received visas for such a school.
Yes, we are first ones from Kyrgyzstan.
Interesting. So, did Jehovah's Witnesses have an office in Kyrgyzstan?
Yes, we have the branch office in Bishkek here.
Okay. And what are you going to do after the school?
We are going to come back to our branch office.
Okay. And it's about six months.
Yeah, it seems that everything is in order.
So, your visas will be ready on Monday afternoon.
Thank you.
As you can imagine, Bulletin Chief felt a huge sense of relief
when they received their visas in their hands as promised after a few days.
Let's look in now and see what took place one week later when they went to boot their flight tickets.
We would like to book tickets to the United States.
Oh, United States. Do you have US visas?
Yes, we have it.
Really? When did you get it?
We got last Monday.
Last Monday? What?
You are really fortunate.
You know, since Tuesday, the US Embassy stopped issuing visas.
Really?
Even representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were denied visas from that day on.
Wow. Unbelievable.
Okay, but when was it that you wanted to fly?
Just to be clear for our viewers, what the Jacquefs hadn't realized was that just after they received the visas in their hands,
there was an issue between the two countries,
and the United States had refused to issue visas for anyone traveling from Kyrgyzstan.
We could understand why the Jacquefs felt strongly that Jehovah God had answered their prayers.
This is Andrew Luellen reporting for GSBN in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.
It looks like Brother Luellen is enjoying the culture.
Yes, and that was one nice hat.
I agree.
We are so happy that Jacquefs made it to Gilead.
Want to be wonderful when there are no more borders,
and the world speaks the pure language.
It sure will.
Many of the students had long distances to travel to come to Gilead.
When the Depalmas arrived from Romania, we had a correspondent there to welcome them.
Let's go to his report.
This is Yandy Argo reporting from JFK Airport, New York City.
We've just got news that the Depalmas have arrived safely from Romania.
We're hoping to catch up with them here at the airport,
and welcome them as they arrive for the 140th class of Gilead.
We know that they'll be arriving at Carousel number three,
so we have to keep our eyes peeled for them.
That looks like them there.
He actually looks Italian.
Brother Di Palma.
Welcome.
This is Yandy Argo reporting from GSBN.
Nice to have you here.
How was your flight?
How do you have a good trip?
Thank you.
Very nice.
Yeah, we are excited to be here.
We've already had a great experience while in transit at the airport in Amsterdam.
That's fantastic.
Please will you tell us about us?
Yes, we met the lady Melina.
She felt completely lost.
She doesn't speak English,
and she was reveling alone.
And then what happened?
Yes, we mentioned to her that we are Jehovah's Witnesses Unroot to attend the Bible School.
And immediately she said, surely this is by God and that we met.
That's fantastic.
Wow, that's Melina.
Yes, Melina.
They are speaking Romanian now.
Can you please tell us what she's saying?
Yes, of course.
She's saying, Claudia, thank you for your help.
Now she gave to Claudia a note to their contact details.
Excuse me.
No problem.
Maybe we can catch up with this story a little later.
This is Yandy Argo reporting for GSBN New York City.
Another nice experience.
It shows that taking the initiative to provide practical help can often open opportunities
for us to present a witness.
The Gilead students all arrive safely.
While focusing on their studies over the five months,
they also had a meaningful share in the ministry.
Brother and sister Tibido, who are here from the Marshall Islands,
had a nice experience.
Well, others from the car group were on a call.
Sister Tibido took the opportunity to walk to a nearby business
where used items are dropped off.
She spoke to a man who wanted to know why there are so many different religions.
Brother and sister Tibido were actually able to return and answer the man's question.
And we actually have a clip showing a reenactment of that call.
So from what we've just read, why are there so many religions today?
Well, as it says here, we're all created with spiritual need.
Wow, it makes sense now to me.
Oh, Hasan, that's wonderful.
Now with so many different religions,
do you think that all of them are worshiping God the way he wants them to?
Hmm, I don't think so.
There are many bad things, audible things being done in God's name.
I don't think so.
You're right.
We agree with so many terrible things going on on the earth today.
What do you think, Hasan?
Don't you agree that we need some good news from God?
Good news?
I really want that.
That's why we brought this brochure today entitled Good News from God.
Oh, excuse me.
Okay.
Oh, my.
Oh, yeah.
He has a lot of stuff.
Thank you.
Man.
Excuse me, sir.
Would you like a text receipt for those items?
Yeah, please.
Okay.
I have three bags with very nice clothing.
Yes.
And the little horse of my son.
Okay.
And the lamb of my mother.
Good.
Yeah. Thank you.
Hello, sir.
My name is Starlie.
Mm-hmm.
While you're waiting for your receipt, may I ask your opinion on something?
Oh, yeah, sure.
Which of these questions interests you the most?
Let's see.
What's the name of God?
Get to help you have my life?
Actually, all these questions sounds interesting to me.
Can I have them all?
Yes, of course you can.
Enjoy finding the answers on the inside and you get home.
Okay, thank you so much.
Have a great day.
Okay, thank you.
See you next time, bye-bye.
Thank you.
So for next week, why don't you choose a question?
And then when we return, we can discuss it together.
Yeah, it sounds good to me.
So see you next week.
Okay, we'll see you next week, Hassan.
Thank you very much.
Bye-bye.
Thank you.
It's clear the pure language reaches the hearts of people of all religions and backgrounds.
And good things come from making the best use of our time in the ministry.
Yes, I understand that Tibidos continue to conduct a Bible study with that man.
That's very good to hear.
Before we wrap up today's program, we're going to the De Palmas room.
They've agreed to take some time out of their busy schedule from studying
to give us a little update on the experience that they had when they arrived at the airport.
We would like to tell you what happened with Melina.
She handed us a note with her email.
We wrote back to her, but have received no reply.
We finally decided to call her.
And from the conversation, we realized that she sent us an email which we never received.
Yeah, she then sent us her original email.
We can read what she wrote.
Here Claudia and Antonio.
I can't wait for your reply to my email.
But if God sent you to me, I trust it and hope that you will write me someday.
I want to thank you for your patience and your help.
Thank you for all the beautiful things you wrote in your email.
I have read in my Bible everything that you wrote.
And I have watched the video on JW.org.
It was very beautiful.
I believe that as you said to me, the world will change one day.
I thanks God every day for having met you.
Thank you again for your help, Melina.
We are so happy to receive her email.
We'll continue to keep in touch.
This was the update.
Now as you can see, we have a lot to study.
So, back to you in studio.
That was a very touching letter.
It's obvious there are many people yet to respond to the good news.
You know, that was highlighted in all our experiences today.
The pure language is reaching all over the earth and having a powerful effect on people's lives.
I agree.
It was very encouraging to see the students working hard in their home territories.
And also, Seja, who was hand in helping them make arrangements to come to Gilead.
And no doubt the training they received has helped them to be more determined to share the pure language at every opportunity.
Well, that's it for our program.
And we would like to say thank you to our live studio audience.
It was so nice to have you join us today.
And we also want to thank all the help that we received from our sister station, JW Broadcasting.
We're now going to hand our program over to our correspondent right here at Patterson.
Over to you, brother Kothan.
Thank you.
For many years, the Balkans have experienced repeated conflicts fueled by ethnic nationalism.
These ongoing conflicts have served Satan's purpose by fomenting deep-seated hatred among the population.
How is the language of Canaan affecting this part of Satan's world?
To answer that question, we'd like to interview three of our Gilead students.
Sister Stretchkivik from Serbia.
Brother Daguti from Albania.
Brother Eliaski from Macedonia.
Sister Stretchkivik, if we could start with you, please.
What was the social and political climate growing up in your country?
I was born and raised in Serbia, which at the time was part of former Yugoslavia.
As young girl in early 80s, I remember watching news about Albanians in Kosovo protesting against the government.
This protest created very negative attitude among Serbians against Albanians, but media made it even worse.
They represented them as trouble makers.
Over the years, there was more political turmoil, situation worsened, and in 1999, war broke out.
My own nephew was forced to go to war, and I cannot imagine what he experienced there.
But when he came back, he was never the same again.
I see. Thank you. Brother Daguti, what about your situation, Gloria?
Where I am from, in Kosovo, there is a strong feeling of nationalism.
Everything in our upbringing started from our home.
The music we listened to, our schooling, we are taught to you serve as our enemies.
The situation got worse after the war started in 1999, so if you had a friend who is from Serbia, you would be considered a traitor.
I see. Brother Eliaski, please.
I was born and raised in Macedonia, which until 1990 was part of X Yugoslavia.
And as Gordana mentioned, nationalism and the media caused the vision between people.
But another factor is the religion.
Due to historical circumstances, and that part of Europe's three religion fight for dominance.
Therefore, it is not unusual in the same Balkan country, people that speak the same language to feel animosity toward each other.
Why? Because they belong to different religions.
I see. Thank you.
Second question. How did this affect you as a young person?
My family was not a jihua's witnesses, so I grew up believing everything I saw on the news.
But that changed when I learned the truth in the 1988.
I see. But the duty?
This environment of strong nationalism really affected me.
I was 15 when the war started in Kosovo.
And later working for the government, you naturally were expected to be nationalistic.
So even though Albanians and the Soviets lived close to each other, it was a big wall of nationalism between us.
Yes. Brother Eliaski.
In the past, I had a desire to be an officer in the army.
Therefore, in 1995, I started with military school.
I graduated in the middle of 1999.
And immediately after that, I started to work as an officer in the Macedonia army.
That same year, 1999, the war started in Kosovo.
And that caused tensions in nearby Macedonia.
That very same year, also, I started to study the Bible.
I see. Now, brother Deguti, if I could start with you for this question.
How did the language of Canaan change your thinking?
Well, the change was not immediate.
Outside the congregation, it was a burning nationalism and hatred towards Serbs.
Then I go to the congregation and I see a different world.
Albanians calling Serbians brothers and sisters.
Hugging them and warmly welcoming them in the meetings.
I could not believe my eyes. How could that be?
But then, knowing the truth, knowing Jehovah's viewpoint,
what does the true love mean and accepting others as Jehovah accept them?
So it affected my thinking and later my feelings.
I wanted to be like others in the congregation, not to show any prejudice or partiality.
So, for example, in our congregation, we had two old Serbian sisters
living in an isolated area.
And in the congregation, we had a program to pick them up and to bring in the meetings.
So I offered myself to do that.
I remember the first time when I drove into that isolated area
and I get close to the house of two sisters.
They saw me and they went out from their home and shouted,
my brother, my brother, in that moment I was proud to be part of Jehovah's United family.
It was a wall of nationalism just broke down.
And I never thought and imagined that one day I will do that.
But only Holy Spirit can triumph over nationalism.
Yes. Good. Thank you. Sister, a stretch of which please.
The truth has brought in my horizon.
It has helped me not to judge people based on their nationality,
not to generalize and not to have prejudice.
In the ministry, I see everyone as a potential servant of Jehovah.
And in the congregation, I enjoy association with various people
and I am very happy to have friends from different nations and lands.
Actually, today, my graduation guests are from four different countries
from Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and from United States.
Thank you. Brother Lieski, please.
After learning the truth, my faith grew stronger.
And in 2001, I left the army and become an publisher.
And that was just months or two before the conflict between ethnic Macedonians
and ethnic Albanians started in Macedonia.
Looking back for that time, I am convinced that Jehovah protected me
and might conscious because I never even try to kill someone,
although that was part of my training.
Also, I want to share another experience.
In 2008, our branch organized special preaching campaign
in which publishers from several European countries were invited
to Macedonia with a goal to preach on unassigned territories.
Together with some of them, we went in an area that was, in fact,
a former military zone.
In one village, we met a man that participated in a war in Kosovo,
South Serbia and in Macedonia.
He was nervous, but after that, the conversation went normal,
but also he was very surprised how come Macedonian came to his village
to talk to him.
In a pass, I would fight against him,
but now I have opportunity to give witness to him.
Thank you. Excellent.
One last question.
How has a pure language of truth been a unifying force in your life?
Please.
Being part of Jehovah's organization is unique and amazing.
There are no borders for Jehovah's spirit.
We all share the common goal to do Jehovah's will and to preach the good news.
People in the world hardly ever have friends in other nations they had
or have conflict with.
It is strange for them how we all can be together in unity.
But here I enjoy being with a wonderful battle family
and in the class 48 people from 29 different countries.
I see them all not just as my friends, but as my own family.
And this is something I will be proud to share in my ministry and with my relatives back home.
Thank you. Beautiful expression. Brother Degerti, please.
Even though people in our region were fighting and hating each other
at the branch in Albania we had a choir project that brought brothers and sisters
from Serbia, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Bosnia to sing prizes for Jehovah.
And it was amazing to see this beautiful family united singing together, dancing together
and working together in the ministry.
It was like a new world.
And I want to mention just an experience one day I was in the ministry with a Serbian brother
and we met an Albanian man and he said, where are you from?
I said, I'm from Albanian from Kosovo and my partner is from Serbia.
He said, why are you together? How could that be?
No, it's not possible. When I said we are Jehovah's witnesses, he said,
now I understand why you are together.
So even people outside the world that are not Jehovah's witnesses can see
and recognize the unity that we have as Jehovah's people.
And thank you for sharing Brother Lijski.
Our branch has organized several language courses among them Albanian as well.
And that really helps to reach the heart of different people living in Macedonia with a bio-message.
Another unified factor are the missionaries from different countries.
And that is really proof to me that we are one unified organization.
Coming here at this school as Petrit and Gordana mentioned is unique experience also for me.
Not our classmates are from different countries, but also being here in Patterson with much more people from different background.
That proved to me that we are one huge unified organization.
And after this, I am even more convinced that if we cherish Bible principles and apply them in our lives,
we can maintain a good relationship with others.
Very nice, thank you.
Isaiah 1918 concludes by saying,
one city will be called the city of tearing down.
As we've seen, the language of Canaan,
that is the pure language of Bible truth,
is successfully tearing down walls of division in Satan's world.
Well, thank you very much, Brother.
You've given the governing body some good ideas for future broadcasts of your sister station.
But now we're going to get to enjoy another fine treat.
We're going to get to enjoy an interview of two of our gillied instructors,
Brother William Samuelson and Kenneth Stovall.
Now, Brother William Malinfont, a helper to the teaching committee,
will conduct this interview with the theme, Training Ministers of the Kingdom.
As you all know, the blessings that have resulted from gillied school span the globe.
Training of ministers of the kingdom.
And the blessings are more numerous than we can count.
But on this occasion, we have two instructors with us, Bill Samuelson and Ken Stovall.
And we'll learn a little bit more about the operation of gillied school
and some of the interesting things that take place behind the scenes at times.
First of all, Bill, a question for you.
Why were you brought into Patterson Bethel back in 1998?
Well, divine education was moving forward.
They were getting ready to start the school for traveling overseers.
The branch committee members was also in operation.
And I was brought in to work with those schools.
Okay, but when you came in, Ken, you were already serving for some time
with the gillied school operation.
Tell us a little bit about the work that you had to do.
Oh, yes.
November of 2015 was 25 years.
So I'm in my 26th year of working with the schools department.
So that's a quarter of a century, 42% of my life, 78% of my Bethel career.
He's a statistician, you know.
Yes.
Some of the things I've done over the years is scheduling classes, instructors,
printing class materials needed for the students.
Working with visas, of course, in the past we had students that went to four assignments.
Now most of the students go back to their assignments.
So we had to help them get into their countries of assignment.
But now we have more students actually coming from countries outside the United States.
So we have a lot of work to do with helping them get visas to get into the United States.
And then in the last few years I've done instructing in gillied and the other schools,
that theocratic schools deals with.
Very good, Ken.
Thank you very much.
So you began your Bethel career in 1998 when you came to Patterson Bethel, correct?
Well, no, not exactly.
Well, I started when I was a little younger back in 1955.
I was at least four.
Well, what was your assignment back in 1955?
I was assigned to WBBR.
We had a radio station and we had a farm and a cannery.
I worked on the farm and the cannery and after there for a short time,
did a little bit of work on the station as some.
Who else was there at Staten Island at the time when you were called in as a young Bethelite?
Well, I was able to find one picture that might help us.
This is the sign leading up to WBBR, not quite as up to date as it could be today.
But the brother on the right is Brother Fred Franz, sister, one of the Kenning sisters.
Margie Benson, Yugi and myself on the left.
But the friends had a studio out there or a study better said he did all of his work out there
for the writing department at that time.
But now this was back in 1955 when you started your career Ken, where were you in 1955?
Do you want to see a picture?
Yes, please.
Wait a minute, it's coming.
There I am.
You got Bethel written all over your face on that, didn't you?
Very good.
Now getting back to you, Bill, what was the Bethel arrangement like at Staten Island,
the house, et cetera, the property?
Well, the sign we saw with the three of us there behind that was a long driveway
with a beautiful hedge on both sides.
It may have a picture of that.
And from there behind that, and if we don't, that's okay, there it is,
had to trim that with hand trimmers.
We didn't have electric yet.
But at the top, but the very top is the house and studio for BBR.
The house to the left, the big house is where we had all of our Bethel people living.
And the one to the right was the studio and the transmitter building.
That's remarkable.
That garden is there at Staten Island, didn't you?
You worked in the field in order to supply food for Brooklyn Bethel.
But there was a brother, an older brother who worked with you there.
He had a saying that was very interesting, Bill.
Tell us about it.
We actually had seven acres under irrigation, overhead oscillators that took care of that.
And we had brother Elden Woodworth.
He had been at Bethel for a number of years.
His wife had some health problems.
For quite some time she was hospitalized, she was just been released.
And he was transferred from Brooklyn, or she loved, to Staten Island.
And now he finds himself digging in the mud with the rest of us young guys.
And of course, he was a lot older.
But you know how young brothers are?
They start complaining once in a while.
Not that any of our Bethelites would ever do that.
But he always, he would listen about as long as he could.
And then he had that expression.
He'd say, it sure is marvelous what the Lord has done with what he's got to work with.
I think that's something we could apply right now, too.
Bill, why do you have such fond memories, though, of the Canary at Staten Island?
There has to be a reason for that.
Well, let me show you another picture.
This one was taken about a year later.
The brother on the left is Ralph Leffler.
He was our chief engineer at the station.
That's Angie Romano-Samuelson next to him, myself, and then a sister, Etta Houth.
Now, Etta had responsibility for the canning.
She looked after the formulas and the cooking and all of that.
I worked in the boiler room.
But Etta helped Angie into the truth.
She was the one that really took her under her wing.
Sort of became a spiritual mother.
I've always maintained that it takes two to make a marriage.
Anxious daughter and a desperate mother.
Apparently, in this case, it worked.
Very good.
Now, when you and Angie got married, then you left Staten Island,
and you had a number of assignments that helped prepare you for your role as an instructor.
Can you give us just a brief summary of your activities after you left Staten Island?
Well, as you remember, you couldn't get married and stay at Bethel at that time.
If you got married, unless you'd been there ten years and your wife for some such thing.
So, we pioneered on Staten Island.
I continued to work at BBR.
Only now it was WPLW, the people that bought it from the society.
About three years.
And we got assigned into special pioneer work.
From there, we got invited to the month's Kingdom Ministry School up at South Lansing.
Kingdom Farm.
And from there, we got assigned into missionary work in Cambodia.
We were there for a short time.
Political situation was not good.
And we ended up in Vietnam, and then we ended up returning to the States.
After getting things squared away physically and otherwise here,
we were put in circuit work in 1965.
We served then for 33 years, 22 in circuit 11 in district.
No, I remember when you used to be convention overseer in the New York City area and when you were on the road.
Now, back to you Ken, why is Gilead School more than just an academic course,
a matter of acquiring knowledge, book knowledge?
Yeah, the curriculum is not designed just to help students memorize a lot of facts.
It's designed to build their faith.
You know, at Luke 247, when Jesus, as 12 years old, was being questioned by the instructors at the temple,
they were amazed.
But it's interesting what they were amazed at.
Jesus was citing a lot of the law that he had memorized or a lot of facts.
It says they were amazed at his understanding.
So he understood what was underneath the law, the principles.
He understood the author of the law and why the law was the way it was and what Jehovah was thinking.
And really, that's the goal of Gilead is to help the students with the knowledge,
to get closer to Jehovah, to understand him better.
And then when they do that, they can love Jehovah better and they can have more faith in him.
And with that strength and faith, they can face whatever they need to.
Very good. And Bill and Ken, you can answer that both of you can give us a comment on this question.
When you first see students come into Gilead and then the time of graduation comes,
are you able to detect certain changes in the students themselves because of the schooling they received? Bill?
Surely, they come in now, the students are already in special full-time service, spiritually mature, solid.
As a result, you may not expect to see quite as much.
It just received an email from a student this morning that was assigned into the field in Asian country.
And they're just overjoyed. They say that every day, they were 23 years in full-time service before they came.
And every day, they think about what they learned at Gilead. It strengthens them.
They come, they're spiritually mature and they leave even more so.
Very good. And Ken, you have some interesting thoughts and comments about reviews the students have taken tests and observations also?
Yeah, it's true. Like Bill said, we get correspondence from the students where they express appreciation, which speaks to your question about how do they change?
For example, here's one, recent one. And this is what they said.
We would like to express our deepest appreciation for the precious education we received at Gilead and the unforgettable lessons you lovingly shared with us.
Thank you so much for the time you spent preparing our minds and hearts for our assignment.
Not a day passes by that we do not think about something we learned at Gilead.
In fact, when we encountered an unusual situation or a need to make a decision, the first thought that comes to our minds is what we learned at Gilead that would apply.
And we really feel that it is helping us to develop a new pattern of action and reaction.
So the students are affected and we see that.
Something that I've noticed that is a change in the students.
And it almost seems like a contradiction, but it's not really.
But here's what it is. They come in and go out with more humility.
Now humility, not because they're beaten down.
In the world, they think to make someone more humble, you have to slap him around and beat him down.
But in fact, they are more humble because of the humble examples they see around them and the kind way they're treated. And it humbles them.
But the contradiction, or what seems to be the contradiction, is they also leave with more confidence.
Now you might wonder, how can they be more humble but have more confidence?
Well, it's not excessive self-confidence.
But it's confidence in the fact that if they apply Bible standards, if they do things Jehovah's way, they see that for sure they will be able to be successful in the assignments they're given.
So at the same time as having more humility, they actually do have more confidence.
That's an interesting observation, Ken. And Bill, back to you now.
What has Gilead School, the entire course, served as respects other schools, a foundation for other schools that we have operating?
Well, the last three years that I was in traveling work before coming to Bethel to the Paterson, I taught the ministerial training school.
And I got familiar with the curriculum, but I had no idea of the basis.
When I got here and got involved with Gilead, I come to find out all of our schools really, back then MTS today, SKE, and all of the ones in between,
are school for the congregation elders.
The foundation is the material that we teach at Gilead.
That is solid spiritual material, not the technical end of things.
But the spiritual instruction is based solidly on the Bible.
And so all of our other schools really benefit from the curriculum of Gilead.
That's fine. And Ken, you made a comment earlier about seeing a miracle every day.
Can you tell us what that means?
Yeah, sure. Did you want to discuss the written exercises?
Well, you can do that, too.
Yes, if you would like to catch us up on this interview, that's fine.
Well, we had mentioned that the students take written exercises. We don't call them tests.
But it is interesting to see some of their answers. Over the years, I've graded some of those tests, and it can be tedious.
But also the reward is that there's sometimes some funny answers that come up on those written exercises.
That happens also because of foreign language, and they're dealing with the English language.
But go ahead, give us a couple of examples.
So we chuckle respectfully when we read those answers.
For example, here was one. The question was based on Leviticus 1626 about the goat for a zeal.
What does it mean? And the student meant to write scapegoat, but they transposed the sea and the pea, and what they actually wrote was space goat.
Did you grade the student on that error? Did you give him credit?
We just wrote a little note and gave him credit.
Another one. What are the three aids to manifesting a long suffering or patience?
What we were looking for were things like humility, prayer, unselfish love, and the student put two of those.
But the very first, their number one answer, their first answer on what would aid them to have patience was marriage.
I'm not going to ask you how you graded that student.
Well, it was a single brother. And my question was, how did he know?
Very good.
So one other was regarding, it was about theocratic history.
And the question was, how were congregation elders first selected?
And the answer was the student put by vote by those fully desecrated in the congregation.
And I'm pretty sure they meant to put.
This, everyone who learns another language knows what it's like to make some very interesting mistakes.
But you would ask about the miracle.
One of the things that really, or the thing that I most love about working with Gilead, is working with students.
It's just an amazing privilege. And that's because, as we've seen earlier in the program,
that our worldwide brotherhood is, in fact, not illustratively, but really is a miracle.
And the insight book defines miracle as an occurrence that excites wonder or astonishment,
effects in the physical world that surpass all human or natural powers,
and are therefore attributed to supernatural agency.
The fact is, there is no human power on earth that could establish and maintain the worldwide brotherhood we have.
It has to be Jehovah's spirit.
And so it is a miracle.
And so when I go into class and talk to the students, and I hear them express their faith,
and they're from all around the world, and their faith is exactly like mine, I'm experiencing a miracle.
So every day of my life, I first hand get to see a miracle, and it's such a privilege.
It's a wonderful privilege working with Gilead.
Very, very good observation, Ken, and the love they have among themselves,
although from so many different lands.
Will Bill, you're getting to a certain point in life that I won't go into great detail on,
but maybe you have a final observation for us.
Well, as I think most are aware, when you turn 80, you generally have a change of assignment here at Bethel.
And a week ago, I turned 80, and now as was introduced earlier in the program,
Brother Mark Numer is the overseer of the department.
The department was formed in 2007.
I've had the privilege of serving as the overseer since that time for the last nine years.
It's been a real joy.
I've enjoyed working with all of the instructors, just excellent men.
And especially with Mark, he's been extremely helpful.
I've worked with him a little longer than just the seven years, going back a little further than that.
But he's been an outstanding instructor as was evident in the talk he just gave.
And the students admire him, and we're going to enjoy working together
as we see the Theocratic schools department continue to accomplish his work.
Yes, indeed.
And can I think you had one other observation you wanted to make about Bill?
Working with Brother Samuelson has been a great pleasure.
He has been a marvelous overseer.
He is organized, has a plan of action to get work accomplished, but he's a reasonable.
He has always dealt with everyone with dignity, and it's been a real pleasure to work with Brother Samuelson.
And also, he's an excellent student of the Bible.
If I have questions on the Bible, I'll go to Bill, and he will tell me not only the way we currently think about it,
but a history of how our thinking developed.
So he's been a wonderful overseer.
Well, I think it's very nice.
You're placing a degree of praise upon your fellow worker, Bill Samuelson.
After all, I'm a firm believer that older men who are teachers and who speak in the congregation are worthy of double honor.
So thank you very much, Bill and Ken.
Well, it's obvious you enjoyed very much that delightful, that informative interview.
And by the way, we appreciate that hearty laughter.
We got a good massage of the heart.
But that was very enjoyable.
Well, we're going to get to stand now and sing a song together.
We have another one of our new songs.
Grant us boldness.
Song number 137.